              energies
Article
A Fully Featured Thermal Energy Harvesting Tracker
for Wildlife
Eiko Bäumker * , Luca Conrad, Laura Maria Comella                           and Peter Woias *

                                           Laboratory for the Design of Microsystems, Department of Microsystems Engineering—IMTEK, University of
                                           Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany; luca.conrad@imtek.uni-freiburg.de (L.C.);
                                           laura.comella@imtek.uni-freiburg.de (L.M.C.)
                                           * Correspondence: eiko.baeumker@imtek.uni-freiburg.de (E.B.); woias@imtek.de (P.W.)


                                           Abstract: In this paper, we describe a novel animal-tracking-system, solely powered by thermal
                                           energy harvesting. The tracker achieves an outstanding 100 µW of electrical power harvested over
                                           an area of only 2 times 20.5 cm2 , using the temperature difference between the animal’s fur and the
                                           environment, with a total weight of 286 g. The steps to enhance the power income are presented
                                           and validated in a field-test, using a system that fulfills common tracking-tasks, including GPS with
                                           a fix every 1.1 h to 1.5 h, activity and temperature measurements, all data wirelessly transmitted
                                           via LoRaWAN at a period of 14 min. Furthermore, we describe our ultra low power design that
                                           achieves an overall sleep power consumption of only 8 µW and is able to work down to temperature
                                           differences of 0.9 K applied to the TEGs.

                                           Keywords: TEG; thermoelectricity; thermal energy harvesting; tracker; wildlife; animal; ultra low
                                           power
         
         

Citation: Bäumker, E.; Conrad, L.;
Comella, L.M.; Woias, P. A Fully           1. Introduction
Featured Thermal Energy Harvesting               Wildlife populations are under increasing pressure. Climate change, habitat loss and
Tracker for Wildlife. Energies 2021, 14,   invasive species are only some examples of numerous threats to resident and migratory
6363. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                           wildlife throughout the world. Additionally, in some cases, wildlife populations can
en14196363
                                           negatively impact economy and agriculture. The result is a human–wildlife conflict that has
                                           negative consequences for both worlds [1]. In order to reestablish balance and harmonize
Academic Editor: Dibin Zhu
                                           the opposite requirements between human society and the need to preserve biodiversity,
                                           effective wildlife management solutions must be developed. Such development requires
Received: 26 August 2021
Accepted: 25 September 2021
                                           a deep understanding of wildlife behavior, possible through high-tech tracking devices
Published: 5 October 2021
                                           able to gather valuable data from animals in their natural environment, in the best case in
                                           a non-disturbing and interaction-free manner. Recorded positions and activity levels of
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                           wildlife can be used to derive migratory paths, reactions induced by stress and the impact
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                           of human-made habitat modifications or losses. Given the long duration of those processes,
published maps and institutional affil-    a continuous and long-time monitoring is a mandatory requirement.
iations.                                         Despite recent advances in the development of tracking devices, most of them are
                                           still powered from batteries. Depending on the number and frequency of tasks required,
                                           the limited energy of batteries may shorten the possible monitoring time. An increase of
                                           power capacities and run-times with this technology typically comes with an increased
                                           battery size, hence an increased size and weight, which may have a negative influence on
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                           the animals to be monitored. A weight below 5% of the body weight is, e.g., considered
This article is an open access article
                                           acceptable as a general rule of thumb for a collar applied to a mammal, but even then,
distributed under the terms and            an impact on the animal can not be excluded [2]. Moreover, the limited energy available
conditions of the Creative Commons         requires a severe restriction of features of the tracking devices. To prolong the device
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://      lifetime, in fact, a compromise must be found between reducing the set of features or
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/           carefully budgeting the energy by reducing the frequency of actions. An exchange of
4.0/).                                     batteries may circumvent these problems; however, this is not a practicable solution. The



Energies 2021, 14, 6363. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14196363                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                            2 of 21




                          animal should be approached and recaptured causing stress and undesired impact on
                          its behavior.
                                Energy harvesting (EH) techniques, i.e., the gathering energy from the direct environ-
                          ment of the animal, may be an alternative solution to power an animal tracker. Several
                          possibilities exists—one may use kinetic energy such as the movement of animals or vi-
                          brations via piezoelectric, triboelectric or electromagnetic harvesters [3]. In [4], a tracker
                          is presented that uses electromagnetism to harvest energy from an elephant’s motions.
                          Other sources of energy can be the body of the animal itself, either by using electrochemical
                          energy via biofuels or thermal energy in form of its body heat [5]. Other studies use envi-
                          ronmental available energy drawn from radio frequency [6], which is typically radiated by
                          another devices or the radiation of the sun.
                                With regard to commercially available systems, solar energy harvesting is one of the
                          most used concepts to power wildlife-tracking devices. The LifeTag™ (Cellular Tracking
                          Technologies) is an example of a small tracker running exclusively by harvesting solar power.
                          The system periodically transmits a beacon signal that may be intercepted to get the animal
                          location [7]; however, it does not have any additional function. Another solar-powered
                          but feature-rich tracker, equipped with temperature sensors and global positioning system
                          (GPS), is presented in [8]. A similar device in [9] uses solar cells as an additional energy
                          source to prolong its battery lifetime. Although solar power represents a good alternative or
                          assistance to battery power for wildlife-tracking-applications, it has a significant drawback:
                          The energy income is unsteady and unpredictable. First, energy can only be harvested for
                          approximately a half of a day during sunlight, given that the tracked animal is not living
                          north or south of the respective polar circles. Second, the incoming amount of energy is
                          highly dependent on environmental factors such as cloud cover, shadowing, seasons, or
                          even the current angle of the solar cell to the sun [10]. If a continuous operation is desired,
                          a secondary energy storage is needed in any case that can compensate the lack or reduction
                          of energy income for at least a couple of days.
                                In comparison with solar energy harvesting, several advantages are obtained by using
                          thermal energy harvesting. In an application at warm-blooded animals, the temperature
                          gradient between animal and environment can be used to harvest electrical energy. The use
                          of thermoelectric generators (TEGs) as a power source makes the system very robust and
                          durable, as no moving or fragile parts are required for its operation. Harvesting from the
                          near-constant body temperature of warm-blooded animals promises a more predictable
                          energy income that might not be as dependent on environmental factors, except the ambient
                          temperature, when compared to the usage of solar cells. Despite the opportunities that
                          such a system could provide in tracking applications, there is few literature about thermal
                          harvesting at animals. We have shown already in [11–13] that a temperature difference at a
                          reasonably sized TEG between 2.5 K to 3.5 K can be used to supply a simple collar tracker,
                          regularly transmitting a beacon signal for localization. In this paper, we will present our
                          more thoroughly designed feature-rich tracking device optimized for an application at
                          mammals. The developed tracking collar is able to record position, temperature, animal
                          activity and transmit these data wirelessly over long distances. Its performance has been
                          analyzed in a long running experiment. The developed system is used in this case as
                          a measurement device to characterize the whole scenario and its boundary conditions.
                          Valuable data about the energy income, occurring temperatures, and other performance
                          parameters are gathered and analyzed. The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, our
                          design focus is explained, followed by a description of the collar’s design and its field test.
                          A detailed description of the system design and its effects on the overall performance is
                          discussed in Section 3. The structure of our field test and its results are then presented in
                          Section 4 and finally addressed in Section 5.

                          2. Aims and Scope
                                Our proposed tracking device and experimental setup follows two purposes. The
                          first purpose is the development of a full-featured tracking device that is solely driven
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                             3 of 21




                          by thermal energy harvested from the temperature difference between animal and envi-
                          ronment. With regard to the limited energy income, we investigate how to reduce power
                          consumption in the tracking sub-system while maximizing power input from the harvest-
                          ing sub-system. Power income and consumption are being recorded in a field test, together
                          with information about how and when each feature has been activated to verify the device’s
                          functionality. The feature-set of the wildlife tracker consists of the following functions:
                                The animal’s activity is tracked and recorded as a single value, indicating how much
                          the animal has moved over the last period. This measurement is implemented following
                          the common approach of using an accelerometer that records events exceeding a certain
                          threshold. More sophisticated approaches may gain more information about the type of
                          movements and detect the type of moving or current animal position. These, however
                          need significantly more energy due to higher sampling rates and processing power, for
                          example, via a frequency analysis of accelerometer values in the tracker itself [14]. For our
                          power-optimized tracker that may use the animal activity to schedule tasks, implementing
                          a simple step counter is sufficient.
                                The position in our device should be gathered via GPS as this is the most commonly
                          used technology and offers worldwide coverage. It did become an essential tool for
                          studying migratory routes, home ranges or the migratory behavior of animals [15]. As
                          other global navigation satellite system (GNSS) systems such as Galileo or Glonass work
                          with a similar principle, GPS is a good representative for this category of location technology.
                          Depending on the intention of the tracking device, positions are recorded at very short time
                          intervals down to a record every few minutes. Long-term studies typically gather a position
                          every hour or with intervals up to 40 h [15,16]. For our device, that aims on long-running
                          observations, one location per hour is an adequate requirement and compromise as higher
                          frequencies are usually not required and are likely to not work due to the high power
                          consumption of GPS.
                                Wireless transfer of the data is needed to gather the recorded data remotely. Technolo-
                          gies such as the transmission via satellite or the usage of cellular networks are common
                          to achieve worldwide coverage. However, both require high amounts of energy, making
                          them unsuitable for our purpose. An alternative with low power consumption is a custom-
                          built world-spanning receiver network such as the Motus wildlife tracking system that
                          is capable of receiving very high frequency (VHF) beacons [17]. It is used to locate an
                          animal worldwide, but only works in areas where a receiver is deployed. The reception
                          of a location history or of sensor data is not possible with that system and thus would
                          negate the advantage of having GPS on-board. Our approach is to use a world-spanning
                          network similar to Motus, but one that offers transmission of custom data at a minimum of
                          energy and over a long range. We found the LongRangeWideAreaNetwork (LoRaWAN) to
                          be a promising candidate as it is already widely used and can still be deployed manually.
                          While the transmission of the recorded history is possible with that system, we have only
                          implemented a message of the last record as all data-points will be stored and later be
                          retrievable from the collar’s internal memory.
                                The second purpose of our developed collar is the collection of environmental and
                          performance-relevant data helping to analyze power input and thermal conditions at the
                          animal. Valuable information are the thermal resistances of the device and the fur-device
                          connections. To get an approximate value, sensors in the housing record the temperature
                          gradient over the TEG and the ambient temperature. Due to the measurement method,
                          we expect relatively high uncertainties of actual values, introduced by varying conditions
                          such as the collar’s varying looseness to the animal or environmental factors such as wind
                          and rain. Still, these results are valuable as average, real-life data for improving the power
                          outcome and weight of future devices.
                                Furthermore, internal data concerning the power income and usage are stored together
                          with the device’s state. It is desired to verify the power consumption for each task executed
                          by the tracker and the performance of the implemented power management. With our
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                             4 of 21




                          implementation, a correlation between power income and ambient temperature, and its
                          possible daily period can be derived.

                          3. System Design
                               The design of our tracker is inspired by available collars such as trackers from the
                          companies Vertex or ATS. These collars consist typically of one or more enclosures. In our
                          case, the collar holds three enclosures, as shown in Figure 1. Two of them contain the
                          thermal energy harvesting part of the system, the third contains the electronics for power
                          management, tracking and wireless communication. More details about the different collar
                          parts will follow in the next sections.




                          Figure 1. The tracker is implemented as a collar that can be attached to the desired animal. Two
                          of the three housings are dedicated to thermal energy harvesting. The remaining one contains the
                          main electronics.

                          3.1. Energy Harvesting
                                The thermal design of the harvester is already discussed in [13]. It consists of a TEG
                          embedded between an aluminum heat connector at the animal side and a heat sink facing
                          the environment, i.e., ambient air. Beside the TEG, two digital temperature sensors are
                          placed on a PCB, which is embedded between the heat sink and the heat connector. The
                          inside of the energy harvesting housing with its components is shown in Figure 2.
                                The heat sink is a commercially available from Fischer Elektronik. Its fins are cut down
                          and modified to be screwed to the housing. The initial thermal resistance of the chosen
                          heatsink is in the range of 0.5 K/W to 2.7 K/W, depending on the ambient wind speed [18].
                          We decreased the fin’s height to 10 mm to achieve a less bulkier device and reduce risks of
                          injuries. We expect a slight increase of the thermal resistance of the heat sink to a maximum
                          of 10 K/W in a worst case condition. Compared to the heat connector’s much higher
                          thermal resistance this should be negligible.
                                The heat connectors’ design is similar to that of the heat sink, as it ensures the closest
                          contact of the heat connector and the animal skin. It is equipped with fins that penetrate
                          through the fur of the animal to circumvent its high thermal resistance. Further details on
                          the heat connector design are available in [13]. The length of the heat connectors’ fins is a
                          critical parameter to achieve a good performance, i.e., a high temperature gradient at the
                          TEG. Too short fins can not overcome the high thermal resistance of the fur, whereas too
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                           5 of 21




                          long fins leave room between the housing and the fur where the ambient air would cool
                          down the device and lead to heat losses. In a test with different fin lengths attached to the
                          desired animal, here a cashmere goat, a height of 10 mm was identified as the most suitable.
                               The two temperature sensors for monitoring the hot and cold side temperature of
                          the TEG are embedded into a small cutout which was milled into heat sink and heat
                          connector (see Figure 2). In the desired temperature range between −20 °C to 50 °C, the
                          sensors offer an accuracy of about 0.1 K [19]. Additionally they are equipped with a digital
                          interface, which allows data transmission between the electronics and harvesting housing
                          with a smaller number of wires in comparison to analog sensing solutions. Moreover, they
                          are already calibrated and do not need an analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) at the main
                          electronics board.
                               The housing at the animal’s side and the outlets for the cables are sealed with PDMS.
                          The heat sink is screwed to the housing against a rubber O-ring that protects the inside
                          against water and moisture. In the housing, besides the structure holding the TEG in place,
                          there is no additional isolation applied.




                          Figure 2. Housing of the harvesting part: TEG with two temperature sensors between two thermal
                          coupling parts. The top-side heat sink is detached.

                          3.1.1. Output Power Considerations for TEG
                                To achieve a high output power of the TEG, a low thermal resistance, hence a good
                          connection to the animal is required. Whereas this can be easily achieved by harvesting
                          from big areas, this option is limited by the collar weight and size an animal can carry.
                          Additionally, a careful adaptation of the TEG to the ambient thermal condition is needed.
                          However, a high temperature gradient at the TEG and a high thermal flux resulting in
                          high electrical output power are inherently contradictory demands. Our approach on
                          the compromises to be taken, especially concerning the choice of a TEG, is described in
                          the following.
                                In our case, we are harvesting at relatively low temperatures and temperature gradi-
                          ents. The temperature of the animal skin is in the range of 30 °C to 33 °C [20], while we
                          expect the ambient temperature to be in the range of −20 °C to 30 °C. It is well known
                          that TEGs made of bismuth telluride delivers the highest performance in this temperature
                          region and achieve a figure-of-merit (ZT) of about 1.0 [21]. However, due to the thermal re-
                          sistances of fur and ambient air, it can not be expected that the potentially high temperature
                          differences between animal skin and ambient air can be used at the TEG. A former experi-
                          ment found temperature gradients of only about 2.5 K to 3.5 K at the TEG [11]. Therefore,
                          this situation is fundamentally different from thermoelectric harvesting devices embedded
                          between highly conducting heat sources and heat sinks, operating at temperatures far
                          beyond 100 °C and with much higher temperature differences ∆T. Consequently, the maxi-
                          mum output power and efficiency of such a device will be low due to the small temperature
                          differences obtained: As an example, the theoretical power output limit when the thermal
                          harvesting device is considered as an optimal Carnot-engine is at only 250 mW [22]. Even
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                 6 of 21




                          then, this output power is only achieved at very generous conditions, with a thermal
                          harvesting device with a resistance of 10 K/W and an ambient temperature of −20 °C. For
                          the more realistic scenario of a 3.5 K gradient, the limit drops down to 1 mW.
                               In the scenario when a TEG is used as a thermal harvesting device, the maximum
                          possible output power is only a fraction of the Carnot-limit. The TEG’s output power is
                          not only dependent on the given temperature difference ∆TTEG , but also on its Seebeck-
                          coefficient α and its internal electrical resistance Re f f , all together described in Equation (1).
                          For the design process of our tracker, Equation (1) states that a high α and ∆TTEG are
                          preferred over a low Re f f . However, if the resistance of electrical load attached to the TEG
                          does not match Re f f , the possible output power given in Equation (1) will not be reached.
                               Another impact on output power is that the available ∆TTEG at the TEG is further
                          reduced when it is embedded between two thermal resistances and a ∆T is applied to the
                          system. Here, ∆T reduces by a factor of KTEG /Ktot , with a given Ktot as the sum of all three
                          thermal resistances of the TEG itself and its two thermal interfaces (Equation (2)). In the
                          scenario at the animal, we expect that our specific design of the thermal connection to the
                          animal has a thermal resistance in the range of 35 K/W while the thermal resistance of
                          the heat sink to the ambient air is in worst case in the range of 10 K/W, assuming calm
                          wind [13]. The TEG’s thermal resistance, however, is often below 10 K/W and further
                          intensifies the mismatch of Equation (2), as a too-low thermal resistance of the TEG will
                          virtually short-circuit the temperature difference across the TEG. Furthermore the sur-
                          rounding thermal resistances decrease the available output power when a load is attached
                          to the TEG and electrical power is drawn. This effect is modeled by introducing an ad-
                          ditional term into the effective electrical resistance Re f f as stated in Equation (3). Both
                          Equations (2) and (3) are put into Equation (1) to compare the achievable output powers
                          for the following examined TEGs.

                                                                            (α∆TTEG )2
                                                                Poutmax =                                                  (1)
                                                                              4Re f f

                                                                                 KTEG
                                                                ∆TTEG = (∆T )                                              (2)
                                                                                 Ktot
                                                                                          KTEG
                                                         Re f f = R0 + Tc α2 (Kc + Kh )                                    (3)
                                                                                          Ktot

                          3.1.2. Optimal Commercially Available TEGs
                                For this project, we restricted our selection of TEGs exclusively to commercially avail-
                          able devices. Although a wide variety of TEGs exists with different thermal and electrical
                          resistance, α TEG , and size, for the purposes of this work it is sufficient to compare the TEG
                          exclusively on a per thermocouple-leg basis. The optimal TEG with a maximum output
                          power for a given thermal connection is then determined by choosing the corresponding
                          number of thermocouples with a specific dimension. This is possible as, first, α is constant
                          over all different sets of TEGs as all use the same thermoelectric materials, here bismuth
                          telluride. Second, for the same dimension and material of a thermocouple, its thermal
                          and electrical resistance are fixed. The overall α TEG of the TEG and its thermal/electrical
                          resistance is then determined by adding up the thermocouple parameters. It must, however,
                          be considered that this approach is only valid as long as other effects such as additional
                          resistances in the electrical connection of the thermocouples or parasitic thermal resistances
                          are minor.
                                To compare the TEGs on the basis of their achievable maximum output power Poutmax
                          and output voltage Vout , the following assumptions are made: An ambient temperature of
                          25 °C and an animal skin temperature of 30 °C, giving a temperature difference of 5 K. The
                          thermal resistances of the connections are fixed with Kh = 35 K/W and Kc = 10 K/W.
                                Here, we focus on the TEG series 1MC06-XXX_xx_TEG of the company TEC Mi-
                          crosystems, which only differ in their thermocouple height and quantity. Other sets of
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                  7 of 21




                          this manufacturer only vary in the spacing of the thermocouples and thus have the same
                          properties with a smaller overall size. To compare the TEGs at the thermocouple level,
                          their parameters, including α, thermal resistance K g , and electrical resistance R0 , are de-
                          rived from the given datasheet of the whole TEG. We have verified that the calculated α
                          per couple is the same for all variants with negligible differences. Each thermocouple’s
                          electrical and thermal resistance is, as expected, nearly constant (maximum deviation 3%
                          and, 0.4 %, respectively) within each set of TEGs with the same height.
                                In total, we have compared five sets that differ in their thermocouple height from
                          5 mm to 16 mm. For each height variant and number of thermocouples, the corresponding
                          output power and voltage related to our scenario are plotted in Figure 3. It can be seen that
                          harvesting at low voltages is beneficial to get high output power. Thus, a low number of
                          thermocouples with a small height is more promising in general. The configuration with
                          the highest output power is a TEG with eight thermocouples and a height of 8 mm (curve
                          ω in Figure 3), offering a promising power output of 70 µW, but has a low output voltage
                          of less than 10 mV.
                                This low output voltage is a problem, as most CMOIS electronics, and also in our
                          system, require a minimum supply voltage of about 1.8 V, which is several orders of
                          magnitude higher. Therefore, an up-conversion of the TEG voltage is needed, which is
                          accompanied by additional losses. Popular integrated circuits (ICs) for this task, such as
                          the LTC3108 from Linear Technology or other devices from Texas Instruments do not work at
                          10 mV or achieve a very low efficiency of only 40% for input voltages around 20 mV [23].
                          Therefore, it is wise to take the efficiency of the up-conversion at the corresponding voltage
                          into account to maximize the overall usable energy. The use of commercial ICs would not
                          allow us to harvest at very low input voltages. However, as this implies the drop of the
                          maximum achievable power output of the TEG, for our setup a custom-built electronics for
                          the up-conversion was used. It works with an efficiency of about 60% at 20 mV, quickly
                          dropping for voltages lower than 15 mV. Given that, the 1MC06-048_15_TEG was selected,
                          as it delivers the highest output power at output voltages around 20 mV. To further increase
                          the input power for the up-conversion, two TEGs are used in a parallel electrical connection.
                          As all calculations are done for a worst-case scenario, the maximum power output and the
                          voltage of the TEG will likely be higher.

                                                                                                                     25
                                    80
                                                                                                                     20

                                    60       ω                                                                              Uload/mV
                          Pout/µW




                                            δ                                                                        15
                                           γ                                     α
                                    40                                       β
                                          β                              γ                                           10
                                         α                           δ
                                                                 ω
                                    20                                                                               5


                                     0                                                                              0
                                           0          10            20         30                  40              50
                                                                 Thermocouples
                          Figure 3. Power output and corresponding open-circuit voltage of TEG for a fin-length of α = 15 mm,
                          β = 12 mm, γ = 10 mm, δ = 8 mm, ω = 5 mm at a total temperature difference of 5 K and resistances
                          of the thermal connections of Kh = 35 K/W, Kc = 10 K/W.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                    8 of 21




                          3.2. Power Management
                               The power management is based on having an intermediate storage that catches
                          enough energy to fulfill the demanded tasks once. This is necessary due to the low output
                          voltage and output power of the TEG that are not high enough to drive any electronics
                          directly. For example, on the one hand, GPS and a wireless transmission module typically
                          work at a minimum voltage of 1.8 V and a supply current of 30 mA, respectively, up to
                          100 mA. On the other hand, the TEGs’ output power will be in the range of 24 µW to
                          220 µW, at presumed temperature gradients of 1 K to 3 K, here with the used TEG 1MC06-
                          048_15_TEG. At the same time, the TEG output voltage will be at 20 mV to 60 mV, which
                          reduces to a range from 10 mV to 30 mV if an optimal load at maximum output power
                          is connected.
                               Therefore, the power management in our system consists of a voltage up-conversion,
                          a capacitor as intermediate storage, and a second voltage stabilization stage. Figure 4
                          shows the entire chain up to the power-consuming part: First, the output voltage of the
                          TEG (10 mV to 30 mV) is up-converted and it charges a capacitor up to 5.5 V. A cold-start
                          circuit monitors the capacitor voltage and turns on the rest of the system as soon as the
                          voltage reaches a well-defined threshold. In the next step, the capacitor voltage is stepped
                          down to a constant and regulated voltage for the main system. At this point, the main
                          system takes over the power management, and only in the event of a very low energy state,
                          the cold-start circuit will cut off the main system from the capacitor.




                          Figure 4. Concept of the power management circuit: The output voltage of the TEG is first upcon-
                          verted and stored in a capacitor. A cold start circuit disconnects the rest of the system if the voltage
                          falls below a threshold. Otherwise, the capacitor voltage is stabilized to the constant output voltage
                          needed to drive the attached electronics.

                                For the up-conversion step, a custom-designed low-voltage boost converter is used
                          based on the design explained in [24]. It provides an unregulated output voltage, a cold
                          start capability down to 10 mV, requires no auxiliary power and has an efficiency above
                          40% over a wide range of the expected input voltage, with a maximum efficiency of
                          approximately 60% at an input voltage of 20 mV. Load matching is not implemented in
                          the boost-converter. As the capacitor is directly attached the output of the boost converter,
                          the overall power input is heavily dependent on the capacitor’s state-of-charge. The
                          corresponding usable powers are shown in Figure 5: At a low capacitor voltage, the system
                          can only retrieve low power from the boost converter, whereas at the capacitor voltage of
                          around 2.8 V, the step-up converter delivers its maximum power. Therefore, the start-up
                          phase from zero power for a system with an empty capacitor, needs a long time. Afterwards,
                          the main electronics will monitor the capacitor voltage and schedule its tasks in such a
                          way that the storage capacitor is most of the time in the optimal voltage range at 2.8 V.
                          Although the optimal power point varies with the TEG’s current temperature difference,
                          this is not monitored. It turned out that in the expected temperature range, the maximum
                          in Figure 5 does not vary too much.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                9 of 21




                          Figure 5. Measured charging power for different temperature differences directly applied to the two
                          connected TEGs in the lab. Only the power-management circuitry (see Figure 4) is used. At 2.5 V, a
                          slight power dip can be seen at which the step-down converter is turned on.

                                The energy storage capacity is chosen in such a way that it provides enough energy
                          to complete the most power-hungry task, here the GPS, once. Long-term storage, using,
                          e.g., a rechargeable battery, could be added; however, it is not foreseen in this concept,
                          as we expect a continuous and constant energy income from the TEGs. In our case, the
                          GPS module CAM-M8 (u-blox) needs around 26 mA in acquisition mode and can obtain a
                          position within 7 s when the aided start functionality is used [25]. At a supply voltage of
                          1.8 V, the energy storage needs, therefore, to provide at least 328 mJ. However, since it is
                          not guaranteed that a fix is always possible within 7 s a minimum stored energy of 500 mJ
                          is desired. This is achievable by choosing the BZ015B603Z_B (AVX) as a storage capacitor
                          that provides a capacitance of 60 mF. When charged up to its limit of 5.5 V and discharged
                          down to 2.2 V, an energy budget of 760 mJ is available, which enables the GPS module to
                          run approximately for 16 s.
                                The capacitor’s leakage is an important parameter as it significantly impacts the overall
                          power consumption of the system when in sleep mode for extended periods. The datasheet
                          claims a maximum leakage current of 10 µA and a low equivalent series resistance (ESR)
                          of 80 mΩ [26], suitable for the purposes of this work. A low ESR is further needed to
                          prevent high voltage drops when a current up to 100 mA is needed during wireless data
                          transmission. We experimentally verified that the leakage current is even lower with 5 µA
                          near its maximum rated voltage at 5.5 V and around 1.6 µA at voltages below 3 V.
                                A constant regulated voltage supply for the microcontroller and periphery is realized
                          by the TPS62740 (Texas Instruments) step-down converter connected to the capacitor (see
                          Figure 4). It is suitable for handling input voltages up to 5.5 V, can provide a constant
                          1.9 V output at a reasonably high efficiency, and has a typical quiescent current of only
                          360 nA [27], which is advantageous to reduce the overall power consumption when the
                          rest of the system is in sleep. Additional circuitry based on [28] is connected to the enable
                          pin of the TPS62740 as a voltage monitor and power switch and turns off the whole system
                          when the capacitor voltage is below a certain threshold. This helps during the cold start
                          phase when the energy storage is empty and prevents possible excessive current draw due
                          to undefined behavior of the periphery in low voltage conditions. Detrimental effects of
                          such a behavior are demonstrated in [29].

                          3.3. Main System and Periphery
                               The developed system can measure five physical properties, needed either for the
                          wildlife-tracking purpose or to log the system performance: Time, voltage of the energy
                          storage capacitor, activity, position of the tracker as well as the temperature difference over
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                              10 of 21




                          the TEGs in their separate housings. The gathered data is stored on the device itself, but
                          eventually also transmitted wirelessly.
                               The overview in Figure 6 shows that the microcontroller unit (MCU) MSP430FR5969
                          (Texas Instruments) does centrally control all other components. It features an inbuilt real-
                          time clock (RTC) that tracks time and wakes up the MCU periodically at a current draw of
                          only 250 nA [30]. While the MCU is always connected to the power supply as long as the
                          capacitor’s voltage (see Figure 4) is above the turn-on threshold voltage, all other periphery
                          can be individually disconnected from the power supply by the MCU with a low leakage
                          switch [31]. This reduces the system’s sleep current to an absolute minimum.




                          Figure 6. Part of the electrical system responsible for the data acquisition. The MCU controls via
                          digital protocols all periphery and may completely cut each component from the power supply with
                          an additional switch.

                                The temperature difference at the TEGs in each of the two housings is measured by
                          two digital temperature sensors, TMP117 (Texas Instruments), the accuracy of which is
                          claimed to be 0.1 °C [19]. The four sensors are connected to the MCU via the same Inter-
                          Integrated Circuit (I2 C)-bus. This avoids the use of additional external components and
                          reduces the number of wires needed to connect the harvesting and the electronics housing.
                                Besides the built-in Ferroelectric Random Access Memory (FRAM) of the MCU, an
                          additional one with 1 Mbit capacity (MR44V064B (Lapis Semiconductor)) is connected to
                          the I2 C-bus [32]. It is used to store the aiding data for the GPS module and to save all
                          measurement data. For the aiding data, 128 kB are reserved. The rest is used to store
                          measurement data, each taking 30 B. For the experiment, a measurement was taken every
                          7 min, hence the FRAM’s space lasts for about 18 days.
                                The CAM-M8 (u-blox), the chosen GPS-receiver, has a built-in antenna and is placed
                          at the very top in the electronics housing. At each activation of the module, the current
                          time is checked by the MCU and the corresponding aiding-data from the external FRAM
                          is transferred to the CAM-M8 to speed-up the position calculation. The module’s sleep
                          mode is not used. Instead, it is completely disconnected from the energy storage to save
                          the about 100 µA the module otherwise would draw.
                                Activity is detected via an ADXL362 (Analog Devices) accelerometer configured so that
                          it wakes up the MCU when a threshold of motion is detected. A counter is then increased
                          by one and is later reset after its content is saved in the FRAM with the other data.
                                The voltage of the storage capacitor is measured with the internal ADC of the MCU
                          via an on/off switchable voltage-divider. It is first captured at the beginning of any wake-
                          up-event and a second time right before the MCU goes back to the sleep state. Both values
                          are later saved in the set of measurement records.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                11 of 21




                                Data is transmitted at 868 MHz using the SX1262 (Semtech) chip embedded in a
                          Lambda62 (RF Solutions) module. LongRange (LoRa) was selected for the physical layer and
                          LoRaWAN to send out a package with a reduced set of data. A transmitted package has a
                          payload of 11 B, respectively, 19 B when a GPS position is found. It includes a coarse voltage,
                          the four temperature readings at the harvester-housings, activity, and time difference since
                          the last wake-up. To this data, the LoRaWAN layer adds 9 B on additional information such
                          as device address and a frame counter. As we are using a well documented and widely
                          used technology that is not only compatible with self-deployed stations, already existing
                          networks can receive and forward the data. With that, we connected our tracker to the
                          world-spanning network TheThingsNetwork (TTN).
                                The main system with its periphery, excluding the temperature sensors in the TEG-
                          housing, and power management is distributed over four custom-made PCBs as seen in
                          Figure 7, stacked on top of each other in the electronics housing.




                          Figure 7. PCBs that are later stacked on top in the electronics housing. From left to right: Power
                          management board with cold-start switch, step-down and step-up converter, but here without
                          soldered transformer and capacitor, board for wireless transmission, board with activity sensor, MCU
                          and FRAM, board with GPS-receiver.

                          3.4. Task Scheduler Algorithm
                                The scheduling of tasks in the main system has a critical impact on the overall available
                          input power. As the TEG-step-up combination will deliver its maximum output power at a
                          capacitor voltage around 2.3 V (see Figure 5) and as no other load-matching is integrated,
                          it is the MCU’s responsibility to track and adapt the load for optimal power. This is
                          achievable by scheduling tasks according to their energy consumption and the current state
                          of charge. High power-consuming tasks are only triggered when the capacitor voltage rises
                          above the respective thresholds. Low-consuming tasks take place at a low state of charge
                          and are done more often to the extend that energy is still saved for a later execution of
                          more energy-hungry tasks. For example, a simple measurement recording happens more
                          often than the dataset’s transmission or a GPS-fix. It is worth mentioning that the system
                          works best as long as there is always enough energy to continuously drive the main MCU
                          with its internal RTC, allowing the collar to track and record time continuously. If the input
                          power is too low and the capacitor voltage drops below 2.3 V, the main system will be shut
                          off hard and will only be reconnected as soon as the voltage is in an acceptable range again.
                          To stay on a point of maximum power and prevent a low-voltage condition, the algorithm
                          chooses between the combination of three defined task sets: (1) the temperature readings
                          of the hot side and cold side in the harvesting housing together with the animal activity,
                          (2) the position calculation, and (3) the transmission of data. For the tasks, five energy
                          levels are defined that correspond to specified capacitor voltages. In addition, a fixed time
                          interval is given for most jobs. A task will be executed if both, the voltage level and the
                          time interval match the settings defined for this task. If the time does not match, the task
                          of the energy level below the current level will be executed. If the voltage level does not
                          match, the task will be skipped and it will be triggered at its next interval. The intervals
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                   12 of 21




                          of the tasks are chosen so that its mean power consumption should be below the energy
                          income. The tasks at levels four and five, acquiring the GPS position, are an exception.
                          In those states, the GPS-receiver uses all available energy until it receives a position or
                          until the capacitor voltage drops below 2.8 V. However, since the voltage in this state is
                          measured once a second, it can also drop down to 2.4 V between two voltage readings. This
                          means that the risk exists that no GPS signal is found and that at least 545 mJ are consumed.
                          Table 1 summarizes the available tasks and the corresponding energy level.
                                Most of the time, the whole system is put into sleep with all components turned off
                          and wakes up only either because of a RTC timeout or when an activity event is detected.
                          In the latter case, the system only increments the activity value that is later sent together
                          with the rest of the data before it is reset. The flowchart in Figure 8 shows the entire process
                          for all events. To lower the energy overhead for the algorithm, the MCU wakes up only at a
                          very low interval of seven minutes. This reduces energy needed for each wake-up and for
                          capacitor voltage readings, but also restricts the time interval when tasks can be executed
                          to this schedule. For our use case, the seven minute time grid is granular enough to prevent
                          the missing of a capacitor overcharge. It also is relaxed enough to give enough time for
                          charging: At an input power of around 50 µW, 21 mJ will be delivered to the capacitor per
                          round. This is considerably higher than the energy consumption of the lower-level tasks
                          that are done with the highest possible frequency, allowing us to save energy for the more
                          energy-hungry tasks at higher voltage levels.

                          Table 1. The algorithm executes tasks according to a fixed time interval, but only when the capacitor’s
                          voltage is in the desired range or above. Otherwise, it is skipped.

                              Lvl       Voltage Range      Time Interval      Consumption       Task
                                                                                                Whole system is shut down
                                0         0 V to 2.3 V            -                7 µW
                                                                                                by cold-start circuit
                                                                                                Only MCU and RTC is
                                1        2.3 V to 2.5 V           -                8 µW
                                                                                                running, timetracking
                                                                                                Measurements are done and
                                2         2.5 V to 3 V          7 min             0.4 mJ
                                                                                                stored internally
                                                                                                Measurements are done and
                                3         3 V to 5.1 V         14 min             8.3 mJ
                                                                                                transmitted
                                                                                                Measurements are done, a
                                4        5.1 V to 5.3 V        28 min            ∼500 mJ        GPS fix obtained and
                                                                                                transmitted
                                5           >5.3 V                -              ∼500 mJ        Same as level 4


                               To conclude, the algorithm will take care that the voltage of the storage capacitor
                          stays above 2.3 V as long as the power-income is at least 8 µW. Only the lower-level
                          tasks are executed at low power incomes (between 8 µW to 9 µW), and all higher ones
                          are skipped. The voltage of the capacitor will then oscillate between 2.3 V and 3 V. At
                          higher power income, the capacitor will reach voltages up to 5.1 V. If this voltage is
                          exceeded, the capacitor will be emptied down to 2.4 V by the high energy-consuming
                          GPS-fix. Considering the efficiency of the energy-harvesting system, it follows that at a low
                          power income situation, the system will be held in a state with relatively good efficiency
                          according to Figure 5. The overall power could be improved by staying always in the
                          high efficiency point, which was not possible in our case as the capacitor needed to be
                          fully charged to provide enough energy for a GPS-fix. However, various concepts are
                          conceivable to improve the situation, and will be followed in future studies.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                13 of 21




                          Figure 8. Flowchart of the algorithm. Most of the time, the tracker is put into sleep and only wakes
                          up after a period of seven minutes, checks the voltage, and fulfills the task according to a defined
                          time and voltage level.

                          4. Field Test and Validation
                               In a field test, three tracking collars were applied to cashmere goats. Those were able
                          to graze freely on an area of about 15,000 m2 at the zoo Mundenhof in Freiburg, Germany.
                          The test took place from 26 May to 12 July 2020, with a duration of 17 days.
                               Two of the three collars were fully equipped as described in Section 3. The third
                          collar, used as the reference, was equipped with a battery instead of the capacitor. In
                          addition, the output voltage of the two TEGs was separately captured via an operational
                          amplifier attached to the MCU’s ADC instead of connecting them to the input of the power
                          management circuit. In a small shelter for the animals, a LoRaWAN-receiver was placed
                          that forwarded all transmitted packets of the collars to a central server via the online
                          service TTN. This allowed us to check the current status of the collars in real-time and to
                          demonstrate the successful functioning of the wireless transmission. The full data set for
                          the analysis was recovered from the internal FRAM of all collars at the end of the field test.
                               The following data was gathered during the field test: The temperature at the hot/cold
                          side of both TEG housings, the capacitor voltage at the very beginning when the MCU
                          was woken up, and right before the system went again down to sleep, the time of the mea-
                          surement points, the activity of the animal since the last measurement, status information
                          about the GPS module and eventually the animal position. The ambient temperature, wind
                          speed, and other environmental parameters were taken from the meteorological city station
                          Freiburg, located around 5 km away from the animals shelter.
                               The average ambient temperature during the experiment was about 16.6 °C, with a
                          maximum of 28 °C on 2 June 2020 and a minimum of 10.2 °C on 31 May 2020. On 6 June
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                   14 of 21




                          2020, rain started with at least 1 mm/d until 10 June 2020, with a peak of 19 mm/d on 5
                          June 2020.

                          4.1. Results
                                Not all collars worked over the whole period. One collar was already heavily damaged
                          after two days and was therefore removed. The second collar lost connection to one of the
                          two energy-harvesting housings after five days and stopped collecting data after seven days.
                          We also removed this collar the next day, as this was due to the same issue: The connection
                          between belt and housing broke, and so the collar was held only by the electrical wiring
                          between the housings (see Figure 9b). The reference collar, which was battery-driven, lasted
                          fifteen days until one harvesting housing got loose in the same way. Although contact to
                          the goat was from then on degraded, it was still working until the end, held only by the
                          electrical wiring. Apart from the mechanical issues, all collars could harvest enough energy
                          to constantly work without any interruption of the system, especially the RTC. During
                          the 166 h run-time of the first tracker, 110 attempts for a GPS fix were made. The second
                          tracker attempted 48 times for a fix during its total run-time of 54 h. In both cases, enough
                          energy was harvested for a GPS-fix each 1.1 h to 1.5 h. Each GPS-fix used around 620 mJ.
                          The scheduler started a major part of the GPS attempts because the capacitor voltage level
                          reached the maximum allowed value (see Table 1). This happened mostly during night—at
                          daytime, a high amount of scheduled fixes were omitted as the voltage was too low.




                                                  (a)                                                  (b)
                          Figure 9. Side-by-side: Collar attached to the animal’s fur in winter and late spring. As the goat
                          lost its fur, the thermal connection is not optimal any more in the field test in spring. (a) Prototype
                          of the thermal housing to determine the right fin length for an optimal penetration into the goat’s
                          fur—done in winter. (b) Goat with the tracker at the end of field-test in late spring. One housing is
                          detached from the collar.

                                About 1429, respectively, 443 data points, were recorded in the FRAM by the energy-
                          autonomous collars. The reference collar saved the maximum amount of 3252 datapoints
                          and therefore started to overwrite the oldest data. Every collar was able to keep the
                          intended seven minute record interval, thus having a high temporal resolution for the
                          temperature and activity readings.
                                To compare the goats’ activities, the number of detected activities are binned to each
                          hour of the day. Figure 10 shows the median of each activity bin over all recorded days
                          and goats. The number of days included in the figure is different for each goat. The
                          median activity of goat two only includes two days, while for goat one and three, seven,
                          respectively, fifteen days are taken into account. It can be concluded from the activity data
                          that the goats are mainly inactive between 23 and 5 o’clock. A lower measured activity in
                          the time from 8 to 9 o’clock correlates to the feeding time of the goats, demonstrating that
                          the daily routine of the goats can be revealed by the activity sensor.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                           15 of 21




                                  Figure 10. Median of activity events measured for each hour and goat during the trackers’ lifetime.
                                  The daily routine such as sleeping and resting can be obtained.

                                  4.1.1. Temperature Distribution
                                       The average temperature-difference at the TEGs of each harvesting housing is (2.5 ± 1.0) K
                                  with maxima between −0.5 K to 6 K. Their distribution for each of the six harvesting
                                  housings is shown in Figure 11. Here, it can be seen that the temperature differences follow
                                  a normal distribution without a lot of extreme temperatures.




      Figure 11. The distribution of temperature difference at the TEG in each of the trackers harvesting housings. Given: the total
      number of measurements for each tracker (N), mean and median for each housing, and a calculated normal distribution.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                16 of 21




                               The temperature difference at the TEG (∆TTEG ) against the ambient temperature
                          (Tamb ) is shown for the first goat in Figure 12a. Despite the large variety of ∆TTEG , the
                          trend reveals that lower ambient temperatures lead to higher ∆TTEG and vice versa. To
                          check for plausibility, a linear regression on Tamb and ∆TTEG is done to derive the point of
                          the x-axis intercept, at which ambient temperature equals the animal temperature. The
                          linear relationship can be modeled by Equation (4) as long as constant thermal resistances
                          are assumed and the ambient temperature deviation is small. In this case, the equation
                          describes the thermal path from the animal’s inner body as a heat source through the
                          thermal resistances (Kc ,Kh ,KTEG ) to the environment according to [13].




                                                   (a)                                             (b)
                          Figure 12. Temperature difference at the TEG versus ambient temperature measured by a weather
                          station. A linear fit is shown to extrapolate the zero-crossing with the x-axis. At this point, the
                          temperature difference at the TEG becomes zero and no thermal harvesting is possible. (a) First goat
                          with both housings having a similar thermal connection. (b) Second goat with less data points.

                               The results should be close to 39 °C, which is the core body temperature for goats [33].
                          Indeed, the results are in the same range with 39.8 °C/37.2 °C for goat 3, and 34.6 °C/35.7 °C
                          for goat 1. The second goat had the least number of measured points recorded, and its collar
                          got loose in an early stage of the experiment. This might be the reason why the calculated
                          body temperature of the animal results in 41.5 °C/56.1 °C. The large variety of obtained
                          results was expected, as especially the thermal resistance of the heatsink varies due to
                          wind speed or other environmental factors such as rain or sun. Above these temperatures,
                          the ambient temperature is higher than that of the animal. The gradient and thus output
                          voltage of the TEG would reverse and cannot be used by our device.

                                                            KTEG               KTEG
                                            ∆TTEG =                  T   +              T                                  (4)
                                                       Kc + Kw + KTEG amb Kc + Kw + KTEG animal

                          4.1.2. Charging Power
                                 The usable input power of the system was always greater than the power consumption;
                          thus, measurements were recorded at an interval of 7 min, as desired. To calculate the
                          mean power income, the difference between the capacitor voltage right before the MCU
                          goes to sleep and at the very beginning of the MCU’s next wake-up is taken. Together with
                          the known sleep-time and capacity, the power income is calculated. In the same manner,
                          energy drawn by the system in its on-state is derived.
                                 For the mean input power calculation, measurements right after a GPS fix are excluded
                          as the capacitor shows a significant recovery effect: A test in the laboratory revealed that
                          after a high and long current draw, here about 30 mA for 20 s when GPS is used, the voltage
                          of the capacitor slowly recovers within several minutes. As the input power is derived
                          from the voltage right after the high load and again after seven minutes, these points show
                          unrealistic high charging powers above 300 µW. In addition, six measurement points of the
                          first tracker and four of the second tracker were excluded as those were showing excessive
                          power drain. We suspect that at those points, returning the full system into deep sleep, did
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                               17 of 21




                          not fully work. In total for goat 1 and 2, respectively, 1268 and 390 data points are used to
                          calculate the mean charging power stated in Table 2.

                          Table 2. Mean charging power of the capacitor, including losses for the up-conversion, storage, and
                          the attached system.

                                                                        Goat 1                           Goat 2
                           Mean power income                        (103 ± 91) µW                   (136 ± 100) µW
                           Mean power income Night                  (157 ± 96) µW                    (217 ± 96) µW
                           Mean power income Day                    (65 ± 68) µW                     (78 ± 80) µW


                               There is a daily period for the power income: It is higher at night than at daytime. Two
                          exemplary days, with their charging power, capacitor voltage and energy consumption are
                          presented in Figure 13. The plot in the figure for the charging power is not filtered, and
                          therefore the erroneous peaks right after a GPS are included. Each GPS event is clearly
                          noticeable by peaks in all three graphs. As the MCU schedules GPS fixes according to the
                          time and voltage of the capacitor (as stated in Table 1), more positions are obtained at high
                          input power phases. Here, the capacitor is emptied to the absolute minimum. However,
                          the maximum voltage is likely reached in a short period where GPS is turned on again.




                          Figure 13. Voltage, charging power, and power consumption of tracker 1 for the first two days.

                                Charging power is directly dependent on the ∆TTEG and thus on ambient temperature.
                          We found that the system has a positive power income, including the power and conversion
                          losses, down to a ∆TTEG of(1.0 ± 0.3) K at the first goat and (0.8 ± 0.8) K at the second goat.
                          It follows that the system installed on goat 1 and goat 2 can run on a maximum ambient
                          temperature of (27.6 ± 1.5) °C and (38 ± 10) °C, respectively. These points are calculated
                          via a 2nd-order polynomial fit on the recorded charging power and temperature at the
                          TEGs. Again, all data points after a GPS fix are excluded. The measurements and their
                          corresponding fit are shown in Figure 14 for the first goat. These values should be used
                          with caution: The erratic influence of environmental influences such as wind-speed or local
                          deviations from the recorded ambient temperature lead to non-constant thermal resistances,
                          which was assumed for the calculation. Another impact is the change of thermal connection
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                             18 of 21




                          to the animal that happened, especially for the second collar that got loose during the field
                          test. It is worth to mention that the charging power is also dependent on the state-of-charge
                          of the capacitor at the time when the measurement was taken.




                                                (a)                                              (b)
                          Figure 14. Charging power versus ambient temperature respectively the corresponding ∆T at the
                          TEG from the tracker of goat 1. The marked data are excluded as these are outliers recorded after
                          using high current periphery such as GPS. (a) Charging power versus ∆TTEG . (b) Charging power
                          versus the ambient temperature.

                          5. Discussion
                                The field test of our designed animal tracker proves that thermal harvesting systems
                          can be used for tracking devices at warm-blooded animals. An average of 100 µW is
                          suitable for systems that spend most of their time in sleep. With a GPS-fix every 1.1 h to
                          1.5 h, our system fulfills the requirements of typical tracking devices, in which the position
                          calculation is executed once per hour or even less. In our field experiment, nearly none of
                          the GPS fixes were successful, this, however, is due to the poor antenna design and position:
                          First, it turned out that a high damping of the satellite signals is introduced by the narrow
                          housing, 3D-printed from photopolymer, around the antenna. A further issue was the size
                          of the electronics ground-plane that did not meet the GPS-module requirements according
                          to the datasheet. The same issues also degraded the range of the used LoRa-modules to
                          less than one kilometer, although an output power of 15 dBm was set, which generally
                          would have allowed remarkably higher ranges. The mentioned issues could be solved in a
                          system that takes the antennas parameters into a better account and uses, for example, the
                          animal’s body as a ground reference.
                                Our setup uses a harvesting area at the animal of 2 × 20.5 cm2 and a total weight of
                          286 g. It has been proven that if loads carried by the animal are below 5 % of its weight, they
                          have minimal impact on the animal’s health and behavior; however, their influence may not
                          be negligible [2]. From that, it follows that our system is already suitable for smaller warm-
                          blooded animals such as the lynx. Higher input power can easily be achieved for larger
                          and heavier animals with larger harvesting areas but higher system weight. The constant
                          power income and robustness of a thermal-harvesting tracker are of great advantage for
                          long-term studies. However, the capacity of today’s batteries is already in a range that
                          can achieve long run-time when used with our low-power system. For example, the CRV3
                          (Panasonic) with 3000 mA h at 3 V could deliver similar amounts of power over a period
                          of 10 years, weighing only 39 g. Still, leakage and degradation over that long time are
                          concerns for battery-driven systems. Nevertheless, using both approaches in conjunction
                          would allow us to double the system functionality and would deliver a fall-back operation
                          for the failure of one power supply.
                                Outstanding features of the tracker are both a high amount of usable power harvested
                          at low temperature-gradients of only 2 K and a very low power but full-featured electronic
                          system. The input power achieved with this design is doubled compared to our previous
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                  19 of 21




                          design in [12]. Substantial improvements are: First, a careful thermal adaption to the
                          animal’s fur as already discussed in [13]. Second, harvesting at very low TEG output
                          voltages down to 15 mV, which we managed to up-convert with low losses. This increases
                          the available energy as the TEGs work closer to their maximum output-power point. Third,
                          the indirect load-matching via the task-scheduler increased the up-conversion efficiency
                          by selecting the tasks in an order for the system to stay close to the optimal capacitor
                          voltage. A narrower control with regard to the best voltage could further increase the
                          usable power. Most of the time, the capacitor voltage was between 4 V to 5 V, while the
                          optimal one is around 3 V (see Figure 5). This is a design choice, as the charging of the
                          capacitor to higher voltages is necessary to provide enough energy for a GPS-fix. Larger
                          capacitances or the usage of batteries would allow to stay near the optimal voltage of the
                          intermediate storage. However, most alternatives have higher losses and leakage, which is
                          an important factor, as the system is in deep sleep most of the time. The main electronics
                          all together use less than 1 µA in that state, and thus our already low leakage capacitor
                          (60 mF BZ015B603ZLB (Bestcap)) has the most significant impact on the overall power loss,
                          with a leakage current of 10 µA. It is worth mentioning that sleep currents could be further
                          lowered by a step-down converter that has even better efficiency than the one we used
                          (TPS26740 (Texas Instruments)).

                          6. Summary
                               We have designed, built and tested a collar to track position, activity and temperature
                          of a goat. It is the first collar that is equipped with power-hungry modules such as a
                          GPS or a LoRa-transmitter and solely supplies itself via thermal energy-harvesting from
                          the animal.
                               In a field test with cashmere goats, a high mean output power of around 100 µW is
                          achieved with two TEGs that operate on the low temperature gradient between animal and
                          environment. The usable mean power at night was higher with up to 211 µW compared
                          to 85 µW during the day. Directly at the TEG, we found temperature differences ∆TTEG
                          of (2.5 ± 1.0) K. According to our calculations, our system can work down to a ∆TTEG
                          of (0.90 ± 0.33) K that corresponds to an ambient temperature of (27.6 ± 1.5) °C. This is
                          achieved with a harvesting area of 2 times 20.5 cm2 at a total system weight of 286 g.
                               The high input power is achieved by: First, a careful thermal adaption and the
                          choice of TEGs with low output voltages but low internal electrical resistance. Second,
                          a highly efficient up-conversion of TEG-output voltages down to 15 mV. Third, a power
                          management that holds the energy storage close to the voltage with the highest input power.
                          Fourth, very low energy consumption in deep sleep for the entire system, including losses,
                          of 8 µW due to extra circuitry that disconnects most of the components from the energy
                          storage. Most of the remaining sleep current is due to leakage of the storage capacitor.
                               With the harvested energy, the collar can try a position-fix every 1.1 h to 1.5 h, each fix
                          using approximately 621 mJ. The wireless transmission of data happens every 14 min at an
                          output power of 15 dBm. With that, our developed collar already fulfills the usual tasks
                          of commercially available trackers. There are chances that such systems might become
                          a robust and long-living alternative to batteries in today’s trackers and enable long-term
                          studies at the animal without needing to recapture them just for changing batteries.

                          Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.B. and P.W.; methodology, E.B.; software, E.B.; valida-
                          tion, E.B., L.C. and L.M.C.; formal analysis, E.B. and L.C.; investigation, L.C. and E.B.; resources,
                          P.W.; data curation, E.B. and L.C.; writing—original draft preparation, E.B.; writing—review and
                          editing, L.M.C. and P.W.; visualization, E.B. and L.C.; supervision, E.B. and P.W.; project administra-
                          tion, P.W.; funding acquisition, E.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                          the manuscript.
                          Funding: The article processing charge was funded by the Baden-Wuerttemberg Ministry of Science,
                          Research and Art and the University of Freiburg in the funding program Open Access Publishing.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                                20 of 21




                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study as
                                   animals chosen for this study are used to wear collars and regular contact to humans. No additional
                                   measures were taken compared to commonly used collars.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are openly available in Zenodo at
                                   https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5547295 (accessed on 24 September 2021).
                                   Acknowledgments: The authors gracefully thank the Mundenhof Freiburg for their cooperation and
                                   their valuable contribution. They supported the experiment with their expertise in handling and
                                   taking care of the animals. We also thank the animal welfare officer of the Uniklinik Freiburg for her
                                   council and supervision of the experiment.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    White, P.C.L.; Taylor, A.C.; Boutin, S.; Myers, C.; Krebs, C.J.; White, P.C.L.; Taylor, A.C.; Boutin, S.; Myers, C.; Krebs, C.J. Wildlife
      Research in a changing world. Wildl. Res. 2009, 36, 275–278. [CrossRef]
2.    Brooks, C.; Bonyongo, C.; Harris, S. Effects of Global Positioning System Collar Weight on Zebra Behavior and Location Error. J.
      Wildl. Manag. 2008, 72, 527–534. Available online: https://wildlife.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.2193/2007-061 (accessed
      on 28 May 2021). [CrossRef]
3.    Adu-Manu, K.S.; Adam, N.; Tapparello, C.; Ayatollahi, H.; Heinzelman, W. Energy-Harvesting Wireless Sensor Networks
      (EH-WSNs): A Review. Acm Trans. Sen. Netw. 2018, 14, 1–50. [CrossRef]
4.    Wijesundara, M.; Tapparello, C.; Gamage, A.; Gokulan, Y.; Gittelson, L.; Howard, T.; Heinzelman, W. Design of a Kinetic Energy
      Harvester for Elephant Mounted Wireless Sensor Nodes of JumboNet. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Global Communications
      Conference (GLOBECOM), Washington, DC, USA, 4–8 December 2016; pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
5.    Dagdeviren, C.; Li, Z.; Wang, Z.L. Energy harvesting from the animal/human body for self-powered electronics. Annu. Rev.
      Biomed. Eng. 2017, 19, 85–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Luo, Y.; Pu, L.; Zhao, Y. RF Energy Harvesting Sensor Networks for Healthcare of Animals: Opportunities and Challenges. arXiv
      2018, arXiv:abs/1803.00106.
7.    LifeTag™; Cellular Tracking Technologies: Rio Grande, NJ, USA, 2019.
8.    Loreti, P.; Catini, A.; De Luca, M.; Bracciale, L.; Gentile, G.; Di Natale, C. The Design of an Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensor
      Node for Tracking Pink Iguanas. Sensors 2019, 19, 985. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Jain, V.R.; Bagree, R.; Kumar, A.; Ranjan, P. wildCENSE: GPS based animal tracking system. In Proceedings of the 2008
      International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, Sydney, Australia, 15–18 December
      2008; pp. 617–622. [CrossRef]
10.   Knight, C.; Davidson, J.; Behrens, S. Energy Options for Wireless Sensor Nodes. Sensors 2008, 8, 8037–8066. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Woias, P.; Schule, F.; Bäumke, E.; Mehne, P.; Kroener, M. Thermal Energy Harvesting from Wildlife. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2014,
      557, 012084. [CrossRef]
12.   Bäumker, E.; Schüle, F.; Woias, P. Development of a batteryless VHF-Beacon and tracker for mammals. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2018,
      1052, 012005. [CrossRef]
13.   Bäumker, E.; Beck, P.; Woias, P. Thermoelectric Harvesting Using Warm-Blooded Animals in Wildlife Tracking Applications.
      Energies 2020, 13, 2769. [CrossRef]
14.   Terrasson, G.; Llaria, A.; Marra, A.; Voaden, S. Accelerometer based solution for precision livestock farming: Geolocation
      enhancement and animal activity identification. Iop Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2016, 138, 012004. [CrossRef]
15.   Latham, A.D.M.; Latham, M.C.; Anderson, D.P.; Cruz, J.; Herries, D.; Hebblewhite, M. The GPS craze: Six questions to address
      before deciding to deploy GPS technology on wildlife. N. Z. J. Ecol. 2015, 39, 143–152.
16.   Harrity, E.J.; Conway, C.J. Satellite transmitters reveal previously unknown migratory behavior and wintering locations of Yuma
      Ridgway’s Rails. J. Field Ornithol. 2020, 91, 300–312. [CrossRef]
17.   Taylor, P.; Crewe, T.; Mackenzie, S.; Lepage, D.; Aubry, Y.; Crysler, Z.; Finney, G.; Francis, C.; Guglielmo, C.; Hamilton, D. The
      Motus Wildlife Tracking System: A collaborative research network to enhance the understanding of wildlife movement. Avian
      Conserv. Ecol. 2017, 12, 8. [CrossRef]
18.   Fischer Elektronik GmbH & Co. KG. Datenblatt Produkt ICK S 50 × 50 × 20. Datasheet 2020. Available online: https://www.
      fischerelektronik.de/web_fischer/de_DE/$catalogue/fischerData/PR/ICKS50x50x20_/datasheet.xhtml?branch=Kühlkörper
      (accessed on 26 May 2021) .
19.   Texas Instruments Incorporated. TMP117 High-Accuracy, Low-Power, Digital Temperature Sensor. Datasheet 2018. Available
      online: https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/tmp117.pdf?ts=1633404466025&ref_url=https%253A%252F%252Fwww.google.
      com.sg%252F (accessed on 26 May 2021).
20.   Cena, K.; Clark, J. Heat balance and thermal resistances of sheep’s fleece. Phys. Med. Biol. 1974, 19, 51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.   Rowe, D.M. Thermoelectrics Handbook: Macro to Nano; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018.
Energies 2021, 14, 6363                                                                                                   21 of 21




22.   Penfield, P. Available Power from a Nonideal Thermal Source. J. Appl. Phys. 1961, 32, 1793–1794. [CrossRef]
23.   Analog Devices, Inc. Ultralow Voltage Step-Up Converter and Power Manager. Datasheet. 2019. Available online: https:
      //www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/3108fc.pdf (accessed on 1 April 2021).
24.   Woias, P.; Islam, M.; Heller, S.; Roth, R. A low-voltage boost converter using a forward converter with integrated Meissner
      oscillator. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2013, 476, 012081. [CrossRef]
25.   u-blox. u-blox M8 Concurrent GNSS Antenna Modules. Datasheet. 2019. Available online: https://www.u-blox.com/sites/
      default/files/CAM-M8-FW3_DataSheet_%28UBX-15031574%29.pdf (accessed on 3 May 2021).
26.   AVX Corporation. BestCap® Ultra-low ESR High Power Pulse Supercapacitors. Datasheet. 2017. BZ015B603ZAB. Available
      online online: http://catalogs.avx.com/BestCap.pdf (accessed on 14 March 2016).
27.   Texas Instruments Incorporated. TPS6274x 360nA IQ Step Down Converter For Low Power Applications. Datasheet. 2013.
      Available online: https://www.ti.com/document-viewer/TPS62740/datasheet (accessed on 17 May 2021).
28.   Biancuzzi, G.; Wischke, M.; Peter, P.D.I.W. Elektrische Schaltung. DE DE102011014512A1, 20 September 2012.
29.   Woias, P.; Wischke, M.; Eichhorn, C.; Fuchs, B. An energy-autonomous wireless temperature monitoring system powered by
      piezoelectric energy harvesting. In Proceedings of the PowerMEMS 2009, Washington, DC, USA, 1–4 December 2009; pp. 209–212.
30.   Texas Instruments Incorporated. MSP430FR596x, MSP430FR594x Mixed-Signal Microcontrollers. Datasheet. 2014. Available
      online: https://www.mouser.de/pdfdocs/TI_MSP430FR59xx_Datasheet.PDF (accessed on 26 February 2021).
31.   Vishay Intertechnology, Inc. SiP32431, SiP32432 10 pA, Ultra Low Leakage and Quiescent Current, Load Switch with Reverse
      Blocking. Datasheet. 2017. Available online: https://www.vishay.com/docs/66597/sip32431.pdf (accessed on 18 May 2021).
32.   LAPIS Technology Co., Ltd. 64k(8,192-Word × 8-Bit) FeRAM. Datasheet. 2016. Available online: http://www.farnell.com/
      datasheets/2625480.pdf (accessed on 18 May 2021).
33.   Goodwin, S.D. Comparison of body temperatures of goats, horses, and sheep measured with a tympanic infrared thermometer,
      an implantable microchip transponder, and a rectal thermometer. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 1998, 37, 51–55.
